Plastic waste is a huge problem in the world. Because of its durability, plastic waste accumulated in landfills and oceans tends to be trapped for centuries, causing a global environmental crisis. Even though we produce about 300 million tons of plastic waste each year, only 9% is recycled. But why are we only recycling so little? The reason is the current inefficiency and high cost of recycling plastic waste, resulting in a lack of incentives. Recently, researchers from Washington State University discovered a more efficient method that can drastically improve the efficiency of chemically recycling plastic waste. Currently, there are three types of plastic waste recycling: mechanical recycling, incineration, and chemical recycling. Mechanical recycling is the most widely used recycling option, and it involves mechanically grinding or compounding plastic waste for re-use in similar products. However, this process will result in poorer plastic quality, and thus these recycled products are not widely used by industries. Incineration can convert plastic waste into heat and electricity, but the process may result in the emission of toxic pollutants such as acid gases and heavy metals. Therefore, the last option, chemical recycling, where plastics are converted to fuels, is considered to be the most promising plastic waste recycling process with the least adverse effects. However, the current technology of chemical recycling requires extremely high temperatures (over 300°C), which is expensive and inefficient.  In order to improve this, these researchers investigated the effects of using different metals as catalysts, which are materials that can speed up the conversion process, while also varying other process conditions such as temperature and pressure. They discovered that, using a combination of ruthenium metal and carbon as the catalyst, they can convert 90% of plastic waste into fuel in just one hour, at a lower temperature of 220°C. This condition is significantly more efficient and cost-effective than the current chemical recycling standard. If we continue our current rate of only recycling 9% of plastic waste, our ocean will contain more plastic than fish by 2050. This new discovery may provide a promising and more incentivized approach for ramping up the recycling process of plastics in the near future. These researchers are now working on trying to scale up and commercialize this process, which will be very useful in the global goal of reducing plastic waste.  The first author of the study, Chuhua Jia, is a PhD student in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Washington State University. Managing Correspondent: Wei Li  Press Article: Plastic waste can now be turned into jet fuel in one hour, The Academic Times.  Original Article:Deconstruction of high-density polyethylene into liquid hydrocarbon fuels and lubricants by hydrogenolysis over Ru catalyst, Chem Catalysis. Image Credit: RitaE from Pixabay The best solution is to ban plastic and replace it with organic paper. If I asked this of my students and their answer started with “Ban this and force people to use this”, would be an automatic fail. What you suggest is not a solution. It could mitigate adding to the problem, but the current situation remains the same. We (humanity) have mountains of waste plastics which if left alone will be with us and damaging our environment for the foreseeable future. We also have billions of people in need of readily available reasonably priced fuel, ideally sourced from something with low environmental cost and somewhere not controlled by murderous thugs and theocrats. If reprocessing plastics for fuel can act as a stopgap until things like EV’s are as ubiquitous as  internal combustion engines, then it should be employed. While limiting the use of petroleum based plastics. Moonshine plastic.. Distilation and cooling of gases into seperate liquids.  In this case you would basically be boiling each part out at a seperate temp. rate. This would cause a longer “cook” time but would allow mitigation of most acid gases. One problem i see as of now would be the fuel source you would ideally want an electric induction heating element.
 I could see an adaption to my earlier comment where an ingenuitive person could make a setup for this… On a small scale. It might be able to supplement the fuel supply you consume, but i doubt you would be able to use it primarily. Not really. The best solution is to have young social media influencers make plastic-eating challenges. Our resolute millennials will munch those 300 million tons of plastic in live streams. What about HEMP for both paper and plastics thank you so much for this cool post. Useful information and nice sharing.
Keep posting, keep spirit, and keep sharing. Great job for publishing such a beneficial web site. Your web log isn’t only useful but it is additionally really creative too. Converting plastic waste into fuel is not an easy task. First, it needs to be broken down so that the oil can extract from its natural bonds with other organic compounds like polymers or carbohydrates in order for us humans to have any use out of this material besides just burning away on landfills forevermore.
Read more: https://www.sequoia-global.com/waste-fuel-recycling/ Plastic wastes have been a major environmental pollutant in many developing countries .This Technology will be of great  advantage to this menace. Dumb question:  What if we started dumping waste plastic into the nearest active volcano? It would quickly burn the plastics expelling harmful chemicals into the air. Brilliant answer! Don’t you just love duality It would rapidly consume the plastics removing hurtful synthetic compounds very high. turning plastic into petrol , diesel is they any chemical additional during the process Currently you have JavaScript disabled. In order to post comments, please make sure JavaScript and Cookies are enabled, and reload the page. Click here for instructions on how to enable JavaScript in your browser. This work by SITNBoston is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.  
Unless otherwise indicated, attribute to the author or graphics designer and SITNBoston, linking back to this page if possible. 