Those of us privileged enough to frequent aquariums have probably experienced the physical inability to move past the illuminated jellyfish enclosures. Something about their mesmerizing movements holds us captive. Most of us, however, admire the jellyfish, murmur incoherently about how majestic they are, and move on. John Dabiri, fortunately, is not most of us. Born to Nigerian immigrant parents in 1980, Dabiri is an aeronautics engineer and the Centennial Chair Professor at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), with appointments in the Graduate Aerospace Laboratories (GALCIT) and Mechanical Engineering. He is widely known for taking inspiration from the living world to improve engineering. His overarching goal is to study the “successes and failure of biological systems and take that knowledge and use it to improve engineering systems.” He believes that there is unrealized potential lying hidden in nature that can be used to harness engineering solutions that would otherwise be dismissed because they are unorthodox and don’t conform to our expectations. So, when Dabiri stared at an enchanting jellyfish, he saw beyond its beauty and set out to understand the efficiency of its movements. Becoming fascinated with their locomotion, he delved into the hydrodynamics of jellyfish propulsion. His lab developed technology to measure the flow currents the animals create as they swim in their natural environment. This allowed them to measure how much energy they expend to swim and how efficient they are. Dabiri became particularly interested in studying whether animals could be efficient yet effective swimmers. For this, he needed to model jellyfish movement. When they move, jellyfish create fluid vortex rings. These are donut-shaped vortices that consist of circulating water rotating around a closed loop. By mathematically analyzing these vortex rings, Dabiri was able to model the optimal vortex ring required for efficient movement. Understanding these vortex rings has implications for all sorts of processes that involve the movement of fluids, from blood flow in the heart and diagnosing heart failure to building efficient underwater vehicles. Dabiri has continued to take inspiration from the ocean and applied the hydrodynamics of fish schooling to design wind farms that harvest energy more economically. The spacing of wind turbines poses a design challenge: how should we optimally space turbines while reducing turbulence between turbines and minimizing the real estate occupied? While studying schooling patterns in fish, Dabiri came to the revelation that by mimicking fish that swim in coordinated patterns to minimize drag, he could re-imagine a way to design efficient wind farms. To this end, in 2011, he established the Caltech Field Laboratory for Optimized Wind Energy, an experimental wind farm that uses an array of intelligently arranged vertical wind turbines to maximize the efficiency of energy production. For his innovative ideas and significant contributions to the field of fluid dynamics, Dabiri received the MacArthur Foundation “Genius Grant” in 2010. His honors also include a Young Investigator Award from the Office of Naval Research and a Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers in 2008. He was also honored with the National Science Foundation’s 2020 Alan T. Waterman Award for his exceptional discoveries.  John Dabiri is part of a wave of interdisciplinary scientists that are writing a language that will better allow biological systems to inform engineering solutions. This is a potentially groundbreaking endeavor, because you never know, sometimes the solution is staring right at you, through a lit-up, glass enclosure. You only need to, like Dabiri, be astute enough to recognize it.  Manasvi Verma, 1st year PhD student in the Biological and Biomedical Sciences Program at Harvard Medical School. cover Image by Vlad Vasnetsov from Pixabay. This biography is part of our “Picture a Scientist” initiative. To learn more about the amazing men and women who paved the way for modern scientific discovery, check out our homepage. You cannot beat the nature hence all you need as a Scientist to follow what nature is doing and  how
Falling apple made Newton to discover gravity
Peter Jost  British Scientist.   who  coined the name the science of friction ,wear and lubrication as Tribology  said that Newton did not see a man slipped over a banana  to discover friction and lubrication
In my five decades of  research  in engineering I have found  it easy to solve difficult problems by getting inspiration from the perfect  Scientist the Nature how  it makes Science to work. Most challenging problem of the century  is to prevent irreversible anthropogenic climate change by green engineering an area I am involved and works documented in my four unique books providing pragmatic solutions
However it is impossible to find a complete solution until the Natural cycle of carbon movement in 4 of its spheres is restored with zero activity in man-made sphere Anthrosphere
I  have given up my job more than 2 decades and doing independent research published four comprehensive books 3 published in USA
and  highly appreciated by topmost scientists in this area in the process of writing 5th book
 on this challenging  problem
Interested to know more  how can we  minimize the risk of irreversible ecological change by restoring natural balance
Ram Chattopadhyay Ph.D (London)
Age 80 plus good info’ john dabiri’  keep up your work  thanks for sharing..  ENERGY AND CLIMATE CRISIS PROBLEMS ARE NO PROBLEM! Solutions are simple, easy and fast! Replacing the use of fossil fuel solves all problems! Wind is the sustainable kinetic energy, water is the best fuel on Earth! Integrated Circuit is a great revolution of the technology sector, it turns the most impossible possible! Integrated wind farm system will be a great revolution of energy! It can obtain more than enough energy over 160 Pwh for our World, and turns water into conventional fuels, solving the energy and climate crisis within 3 years! My invention is published on uspto.gov with app# 20210017956, title: “wind tower complex”.   Because I can’t do it all by myself, sincerely looking for countries, organizations and all people, who are willing to combat the energy and climate crisis, give me a little bit of political, financial and technical support! Together build a sustainable future for better living. All support will be calculated as investment, shares and partnership of our organization, together to share future return!  Interested, please contact sektong-chan@msn.com more detailed description and functions are available. Questions and comments are welcome! Nuclear, hydro, solar, onshore and offshore wind farms all add together are only able to supply 35% of global electricity consumption 23000 TWH. The others are fossil energy. But  they are using up a lot of fossil energy for cement, steel, metal and many other materials to build their equipment, transmission networks construction and installation, creating more carbon and emission than they will save! Occupy and spoil huge natural areas! More will accelerate climate change worse faster!
“Small turbines can outperform conventional wind farms, Stanford Prof. says, with no bird kill!”. Small turbines not only outperform conventional but nuclear power plants too!  https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeffmcmahon/2016/04/29/stanford-small-wind-arrays-can-outperform-conventional-wind-farms-with-no-bird-kill/?sh=21ab9bc592a7
With this idea, I successfully invented a breakthrough renewable energy production system. It is able to provide more than enough electricity and energy over 160 PWH for our World, to reduce and replace the use of fossil energy, alter climate change and solve most major problems on Earth! Without big investment, without occupying big areas. And published on uspto.gov with app# 20210017956, title: “wind tower complex”.  Because I can’t do it all by myself, sincerely looking for countries, organizations and all people, who are willing to combat the energy and climate crisis, give me a little bit of political, financial and technical support! Together build a sustainable future for better living. All support will be calculated as investment, shares and partnership of our organization, together to share future return!  Interested, please contact sektong-chan@msn.com more detailed benefits and functions are available. Questions and comments are welcome! Currently you have JavaScript disabled. In order to post comments, please make sure JavaScript and Cookies are enabled, and reload the page. Click here for instructions on how to enable JavaScript in your browser. This work by SITNBoston is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.  
Unless otherwise indicated, attribute to the author or graphics designer and SITNBoston, linking back to this page if possible. 