             Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or Lou Gehrig’s Disease, is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder marked by the death of neurons that control movement. This leads to loss of motor function, respiratory failure, and death, often within just 2-3 years from symptom onset. Causes of the disease are still largely unknown, with only 10% of cases having an identified genetic basis. Only two drugs are currently FDA-approved for the treatment of ALS, and both can only modestly slow disease progression. A recent publication presented exciting clinical results for a new drug combination that targets potential mechanisms of neuronal cell death. This therapy was developed by the biotech company Amylyx in Cambridge, MA, a venture started by founders Joshua Cohen and Justin Klee in a Brown University dorm room, and the funding for the particular trial came from donations from 2014’s ALS Ice Bucket Challenge.             The trial followed the disease progression of 139 ALS patients. Participants were followed over 24 weeks and clinical outcomes were recorded. The main outcome followed by the researchers was the rate of decline on the ALS Functional Rating Scale- Revised, or ALSFRS-R, a clinical scale used to score patients’ motor control and breathing. The rate of change on this scale over time gives doctors an idea of how quickly the disease is progressing. Treated patients scored 2.3 points higher, on average, than the untreated group at the end of the trial. This is equivalent to the treated group having six weeks less disease progression than the untreated group.            Though the exact underlying mechanism for this drug combination has not been confirmed yet, it’s believed that the two drugs address separate causes of neuronal cell death. One cause is when defective proteins clump together in a part of the cell called the endoplasmic reticulum, preventing functional proteins from being properly made and released. The first drug helps proteins fold into their correct form and prevents them from aggregating. The other cause is dysfunctions in how the cell makes energy, which the second drug addresses by changing the composition of the cell substructure responsible for energy production. Together, this drug combination seems to make it less likely for the cell to die due to these two stresses.             While a six-week improvement over 6 months doesn’t sound like much, this is equivalent to about six months in the 2-year expected lifetime of an ALS patient following symptom onset. Additionally, the two cellular stresses that drug combination is believed to target are common in other neurodegenerative disorders. This means that this therapy may be effective for other conditions as well, like Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s. The next step for these drugs as an ALS treatment is to conduct a larger phase 3 clinical trial, which will give a better picture of how effective this therapy is over longer time periods and in more patients. Other questions still need to be answered, such as how this therapy is influenced by the use of the other FDA-approved ALS drugs, and what dose is optimal for slowing disease progression. In any case, these results could be the first significant step in improving quality of life and lifespan of ALS patients, and potentially patients of other disorders too.  Sabrina Paganoni is an Assistant Professor at Harvard Medical School and a physician scientist at the Healy Center of ALS at Massachusetts General Hospital. Joshua Cohen and Justin Klee are graduates from Brown University and are the CEO and President of Amylyx Pharmaceuticals in Cambridge, MA, respectively. Managing Correspondent: Andrew T. Sullivan Press Articles: “Drug Combination Slows Progression of ALS And Could Mark ‘New Era’ In Treatment,” NPR “New Treatment for Lou Gehrig’s Disease Shows Promise,” The New York Times “Experimental drug for ALS, dreamed up in a dorm room, offers patients glimmer of hope,” STAT Original Journal Article: “Trial of  Sodium Phenylbutyrate-Taurursodiol for Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis,” New England Journal of Medicine Image Credit: Pixabay Disease should not be ignored by anyone. It is essential that proper medication is taken and therapies are also given importance so that one can easily deal with health issues. The above information about ALS and its therapies is actually grat and will help a lot of people. Keep sharing this more and more! It is sad to know that the causes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are still largely unknown, with only 10% of cases having an identified genetic basis. It is even sadder to know that the world’s leaders spend dozens of times more on deadly weapons. It would be better to provide more resources for research on ALS, as well as pandemics that threaten humanity. ALS causes are still not clear so individuals should investigate the treatments before they go for. As we all know that ALS causes are not so clear but here we can find out the best information about ALS and its treatment.  it’s quite helpful and research-based information, but if you still want to read more about ALS and its treatment you can find out the latest research work at XERAMED. Amazing Information. Thank you for giving information about Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis disease in such a way that anyone can easily understand everything about the disease. According to the studies, R3 Stem cell therapy may have the ability to slow the progression of ALS. R3 stem cell is a therapy by which many diseases can be a cured, and ALS  is one of them. So, must search for that. Hi, I was diagnosed in March 2017 but was running around from doctor to doctor before I finally get a result that I was free from MND ALS. Mine started on top and progressed to the bottom I could walk very little but needed assistance as I have no balance. It is sad all the time that we thought this disease has no cure with all the technology we have while there are some formulas there that can relieve all symptoms and get rid of this of Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). I’m passing this info to anyone at there because www multivitamincare org has the right cure and caregiver for this disease ….I took various supplements, medicine prescribed by a neurologist, massage, and physiotherapy still the disease was progressing very fast until the ALS formula from that company. This was great, I have been researching for a while now, and I think this has helped. Have you ever come across Healthherbsclinic com Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis HERBAL FORMULA (just google it). It is a smashing one of a kind product for reversing ALS completely. Ive heard some decent things about it and my buddy got amazing success with it. Currently you have JavaScript disabled. In order to post comments, please make sure JavaScript and Cookies are enabled, and reload the page. Click here for instructions on how to enable JavaScript in your browser. This work by SITNBoston is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.  
Unless otherwise indicated, attribute to the author or graphics designer and SITNBoston, linking back to this page if possible. 