Who says finance is boring?  These stories, written about HBS faculty research and case studies, cover such diverse topics as financial adviser robots, the rise of impact investing, and the tell-tale signs that brokers are giving illegal investment tips to their best customers.
 How Chase Sapphire Made Credit Cool for Millennials The Chase Sapphire Reserve card was one of the hottest product launches in 2016. But what would be JP Morgan's next act be? State Street’s SHE: Investing in Women Leaders Index funds are the major shareholders in many large- and medium-sized public companies, but their passive investment nature offers few checks on those companies’ executives. Vanguard, Trian And The Problem With 'Passive' Index Funds As investors increasingly demand investment opportunities that match their social beliefs, financial services firms are busy designing new products. How State Street Global Advisers is responding the expanding influence of impact investing. What Jane Austen and Mel Brooks Can Teach Us About Finance A new book links the fundamentals of finance to several centuries of literature, history, philosophy, music, visual arts, theater, and comedy to make the subject seem less mystifying—and more humanizing—to a broad audience of non-financiers.  Are Stockbrokers Illegally Leaking Confidential Information to Favored Clients? New research reveals stockbroker behavior that is probably illegal, definitely underregulated, and arguably influential in the day-to-day operations of the stock market. Why Global Investments Are Still a Good Bet International markets often move together, so does a global investment portfolio even make sense anymore? Why there are plenty of advantages in looking beyond home markets. Building India’s First $100 Billion Company Startups welcome growth but are often strangled by it. This podcast discusses how entrepreneur Vijay Shekhar Sharma is meeting this challenge with his mobile payments company Paytm.  Why Millennials Flock to Fintech for Personal Investing  New tech-heavy financial firms are helping millennials invest, but with a twist. They are swapping out investment advisers for financial robots, and passing along the savings.  A Bank That Takes Parmesan as Collateral: The Cheese Stands a Loan Italian regional bank Credito Emiliano accepts young Parmigiano-Reggiano as collateral, and then ages it in climate-controlled vaults. Here's why.  Inventory Management for Mobile Money Agents in the Developing World Mobile money agents in the developing world face a key inventory management challenge: How much cash and e-float should be held to minimize both stockouts and excess working capital?  Lessons Unlearned? Corporate Debt in Emerging Markets Emerging markets are contending with a worrisome slowdown in economic growth accompanied by the build-up of corporate debt.  Is Greed Ruining Private Equity Firms? In a first-ever look at the internal economics driving private equity partnerships, researchers find that founding partners who take an unequal share of the pie can ruin their firms. Share your insights below. 