Date: January 9-10, 2008
Faculty Chairs: Josh Lerner, William Sahlman Colloquium: Venture Capital The VC Conference is one in a series of 14 alumni and  practitioner forums Harvard Business School is hosting as part of its  Centennial celebration. Through it, HBS honors the important contributions  made by its graduates to the development of the VC industry, and who today are  estimated to make up more than 20 percent of the world's venture capitalists.  
  The contributions of HBS faculty and alumni to the  development and shaping of the industry cannot be over­emphasized: they  included pioneering players who launched important firms and invested in some  of society's most important companies. As VC increasingly becomes a worldwide  phenomenon, moreover, HBS will continue to have a decisive impact on the  national and international economy.  
  It is appropriate that the conference took place in  Silicon Valley. This all but unique confluence of ideas, research, financing,  and human resources has served as a matrix in which venture capital has either  invented or revolutionized whole industries and changed the U.S.—and now the  world—economies forever. The conference addressed some major issues and questions:  Those attending the Conference represented the leaders of  the venture capital industry. It is our hope that listening to the speakers and  panel discussions and engaging in dialogue will stimulate further discussions, generate new ideas, and nurture the community of HBS graduates and others in  the VC industry worldwide. 
We asked participants what venture capitalists foresee as  the significant upcoming strategic developments in their industry. What  problems do they anticipate? They raised issues of reorganization,  diversification, new sites for operation and investment, and the problems  raised by the U.S. economy and policy. Among the major points of discussion: 
Many in the venture capital industry have argued that it has no  strategy, it just follows the crowd. Panelists believe that strategies of  various kinds—to differentiate, to locate and hire in foreign countries and cultures, to build trust, even about whether to go global or not—are a necessity now that the VC industry operates in a globalized world. Among the  major points discussed:  This was not a major focus of the conference.  