Harvard Business School spends a significant amount of research funds each year on the health care industry, answering questions such as: How can the business of health care be made more efficient?  What can a business do to motivate employees to take better care of themselves? What does financial accounting have to do  with improving patient outcomes in Haiti? HBS faculty members discuss their research and what it means for patients, providers, and industries.  Clayton Christensen on Disrupting Health CareIn a 2009 interview, the late Clayton Christensen examined the health care landscape through a lens of disruptive innovation.   How Electronic Patient Records Can Slow Doctor Productivity Instead of making health care delivery more efficient, electronic health records may be doing just the opposite. Women Heart Patients Have Better Survival Odds with Women Doctors Roughly one in 66 women has a better chance of leaving the hospital alive if their doctor is also a woman.  Behavioral Economists Can Make You a Healthier Consumer and Smarter Marketer Psychological "interventions" companies can take to help employees make healthier decisions.  Distressed Employees? Try Resilience TrainingDepressed employees are up to five times more likely to experience work-related problems than employees with chronic physical illnesses. So why aren't employers helping them? What Hospitals Must Learn to CompeteWhy is it so difficult for American health care providers to compete for customers?  Consumers Blame Business for Global Health Problems. Can Business Become the Solution? Millions of people have been harmed by cigarettes, defective merchandise, pollution, addiction and other business by-products. now, pioneering companies are exploring healthier ways to operate.  Why Business Should Support Employees Who Are Caregivers Shifting demographics are causing an increasing number of people to act as caregivers for family and friends—but employers seem hardly to notice the trend. The Economic Cost of Physician Burnout
Doctor burnout takes a toll on physicians and patient care, but there is another cost to be accounted for. Germany May Have the Answer for Reducing Drug PricesIn Germany, drugmakers must prove that a new medication’s benefits merit a higher price than existing drugs.  Making Health Insurance That Consumers Actually Like Health insurance that consumers like? Doesn’t sound possible, but South African company Vitality is doing just that.  How Cost Accounting is Improving Healthcare in Rural HaitiWhat happened when a pioneering cost accounting system examined wide variances in Haiti's health delivery costs. Medicare for All or Public Option: Can Either Heal Health Care?A public insurance option could use its scale to hold prices down, but only if the approach avoids the financing gimmicks that are undermining Medicare.  Cohort Turnover and Operational Performance: The July Phenomenon in Teaching HospitalsQuality of care may drop for a period as medical residents turn over in teaching hospitals.  Who Drives Digital Innovation? Evidence from the US Medical Device IndustryDoes large-scale technological change characteristic of an industrywide digital transformation entrench industry leaders or enable the rise of new entrants? What the medical device industry teaches us.  Image: skynesher 