The migration of high-skilled individuals around the world is shaping our lives and future wherever we live and work, says HBS professor Bill Kerr, a scholar of entrepreneurial management and the future of work. He is the Dimitri V. D'Arbeloff - MBA Class of 1955 Professor of Business Administration.  His new book, The Gift of Global Talent: How Migration Shapes Business, Economy and Society, to be published October 2, focuses on the benefits and pain points of high-skilled migration.   “We explore why global talent flows matter so much, from superstar scientists to white-collar workers. There are many parts worthy of celebration, but also many parts to critique,” Kerr writes. He aims at providing a foundation for better conversation and information, clearer pathways to knowledge sharing, and more insightful policies.  Martha Lagace:  Why do you focus your book on global talent flows?  William Kerr:  I focus on the policies and business implications of high-skilled immigration due to the powerful way that global talent connects to our companies and the particular set of policies that govern their admissions. I want to uncover how this part of our business, economic, and social landscape operates and to argue, hopefully in an accessible format, for ways to make this process better.    We also recognize that, over the long-term, broader migration impacts our talent levels in the United States. No question, the American Dream has always been that someone could arrive penniless and work their way upward by becoming more educated, creating their own business, etcetera, if not for themselves then for their children. I recognize and appreciate these aspirations and goals, but the book spends less time on this front, as policies related to general family-based migration into America are quite distinct from those used by employers for global talent.  Lagace:  Not everyone benefits equally, as you make clear.  Kerr:  Right. The book brings to the surface both who really obtains the gift of global talent—who benefits the most from this gift—and also who does not benefit or gets hurt. I have a strong opinion, quickly evident to a reader, that overall the migration of talented people around the world has been a big benefit. The ability to match individuals to the best places to use their skills and passions can generate extraordinary economic progress, and we can all connect into and benefit from that growth.    Lagace:  The H-1B visa process began with the Immigration Act of 1990, as you explain.  What trends do you see?  Kerr:  There are several programs for employment-based migration to America. The one that has captured our attention and still retains features from its beginnings in the 1990s is H-1B. Science and engineering was part of it in the early days but was not anywhere near as dominant as today. Any migrant in a specialty occupation, whether as a pastor, advertising executive, or academic, for example, can potentially enter the country on an H-1B. What the book walks through is why STEM work and in particular computer programming have become so important. Today these fields comprise about three-quarters of inbound admissions for firms.    Lagace: How can smaller countries gain a foothold in global talent flows, their own and other countries’?  Kerr:  Every country needs to think about what enables this world of global talent and the companies they are connected with to be part of their economy. While remittances are an important development pillar, it is critical to think strategically about accessing high-skilled talent and its employment aspects, such as recruitment and retention. Do the policies of your country push global companies away? Similarly, it is often hard to spot talent, and rising inequality makes this task even harder for those disadvantaged. It is important to have opportunity for everyone; and from the point of view of “Are we making the most of our talent?” this is a loss.     Lagace:  As you write, while the US has benefitted enormously from global talent, it cannot expect to continue indefinitely. Could you elaborate?  Kerr:  The recent actions of the Trump Administration have definitely made it harder to use the H-1B visa system. But, a bigger concern for me is the rhetoric surrounding high-skilled migration and the uncertainty this has placed on whether global talent considers America its first choice. What has led to the US still being so successful was that there are great opportunities here and people understood what they were getting into. The visa process was never enjoyable nor user friendly, but at least one understood the process and rules of the game.      Interview conducted September 20, 2018. Transcript edited for length and clarity.  The chapters ahead describe how America came to [its] leading position and its impressive strengths. However, the U.S. has often taken its special position for granted and has done little recently to make itself more attractive. This contrasts sharply with the efforts countries are taking to become more competitive for talent. During periods when the U.S. system has been particularly frustrating, billboards cropped up around Silicon Valley to advertise moving north to Canada!   As the hostility toward immigrants increases in America, Canada is doubling down with new programs like its Global Skills Strategy
 to lure in innovative companies. Beyond just making visas available, Canada promises employers [that] “a new dedicated team at Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) will provide all Global Talent Stream employers with streamlined, client focused service ... [including] faster processing of your Global Talent Stream applications with a service standard of 10-business days ... [and] personalized, high-touch assistance throughout the assessment process.”   Countries that have historically had lower rates of skilled immigration are also exploring how to attract talent. Some efforts are symbolic—Malaysia literally rolled out the red carpet for immigration lines at some airports to signify the importance of talented individuals (a far cry from the heavy-handed shake-down of many immigration queues!). Other countries are 
aggressively challenging conventional wisdom. Start-Up Chile is a program that pays foreign entrepreneurs $40,000 to stay in Chile for at least six months, only requiring that visiting entrepreneurs participate in local community events that help build Chile’s start-up culture. This is far from a typical use of taxpayer funds, and the program is unlikely to land the next WhatsApp. But it is helping Chile build a global business network to foreign talent.   Migration patterns are not immutable laws of nature, even with America’s enormous head start. Through these and other programs, countries are seeking to close the gap bit by bit and become more attractive to talent migrating locally in their own parts of the world. Skilled
worker migration is the outcome of a complex process that involves firms, universities, and national governments. Not everyone gets their first choice of country, and many countries likewise don’t get their first choice of talent. To make progress, let’s start with the migrants: Why do they move?  Excerpted from The Gift of Global Talent: How Migration Shapes Business, Economy & Society, by William R. Kerr, (c) 2018 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Jr. University. Forthcoming from Stanford University Press in October 2018. 