 The recent twin economic and pandemic calamities should cause us to rethink the status quo for health insurance compensation.   Must General Motors be a benefits company that happens to make cars?  Is it in the best interest of employees if their employer chooses the health insurance they should have, rather than what they want?  Is it reasonable for employers to be allowed a tax benefit for paying for health insurance benefits, but not their employees, when the insurance is primarily funded through reductions in employee income? Must health insurance prices for the self-insured be so high?   We propose a way to alter our health insurance benefits universe for insured employees and the self-insured by combining the best of Republican and Democratic ideas about health insurance.   A  union between President Donald Trump's health reimbursement arrangements (HRA) rule and Joe Biden’s Public Option would go a long way to bringing more choice, affordability, and personal control to the purchase of health insurance. Trump’s rule enables employees in small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to use tax-free funds, which their employers deposit in Individual Coverage Health Reimbursement Arrangements (ICHRAs), to buy Section 1301 qualified health plans in the individual market. We advocate that the Trump rule be expanded to designate the Public Option as one of the insurance options for employees, thus expanding choice. Our version of the Public Option would be run by private insurers but pay Medicare’s prices to providers.   As a result of this HRA-Public Option combination, employers that are now compelled to continually raise out-of-pocket expenses to employees  to control health care costs will no longer be caught  in the middle between the complaints of employees and the demands of dominant health insurance companies. As for SME employees, they will  now have more choice than the two or fewer plans that 87 percent of firms with fewer than 1,000 employees now offer and pay less for their health insurance.  In addition, they will have commensurately more disposable income, and some could be newly insured because of the lowered costs.  Both sides will benefit from the control in costs, reduction of Medicare’s costs, and revitalization of the insurance market that this proposal will create.    Our proposal charts a bipartisan path. It bolsters the Democratic mandate for universal care via the Public Option. But, unlike Medicare, with its trillions of unfunded liabilities, our version of the Public Option would be pay-as-you-go. It would also broaden the risk pool and thus reduce Medicare’s expenses because non-seniors are healthier and consume fewer health services. This proposal enables Republicans to give insured employees and the self-insured increased competition and choice.   This union could be created by using a presidential executive order to designate the Public Option as a “qualified health plan” for purposes of Internal Revenue Code section 36B(c)(3)(A).  It would enable covered employees to purchase Public Option coverage with tax-free contributions from employer-funded ICHRAs.   This HRA-Public Option combination could reduce the premiums not only of the millions of insured SME employees and family members, but also those of the 3.4 million Americans in the individual market who pay entirely for their own insurance with after-tax dollars. (These numbers of uninsured SME employees and unsubsidized individual market enrollees, change over time. In particular, COVID-19-related job losses have surely reduced the number of uninsured SME employees as some laid-off workers have become newly eligible for coverage under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) or Medicaid.)   Some contend that the Public Option’s low-cost premiums are falsely achieved by shifting Medicare’s costs to private insurers, but Medicare’s massive scale—61.2 million enrollees—delivers genuine efficiencies. Medicare pays hospitals 35 to 65 percent less than private insurers for the same services.   Using 2018 data (the most recent year for which all relevant data is available), we found that a pay-as-you-go Public Option could lower the price for the 3.4 million people who now buy unsubsidized Bronze, Silver, and Gold insurance plans from the Obamacare exchanges, as well as SME employees. The average premium would likely decrease for a Silver plan by $3,588 when compared to the Affordable Care Act (ACA) premiums and $3,609 compared to those paid by SME employees. In this calculation the Public Option is offered by a licensed health insurer who pays Medicare’s rates to providers. (For the purposes of this example, we assume Medicare pays providers 50 percent of the rates paid by private plans, at the midpoint of the 35 percent to 65 percent Medicare discounts reported by researchers.)   Pricing Public Option premiums on an actuarially valid, pay-as-you-go basis would avoiding worsening Medicare’s mammoth unfunded liabilities and could even help address them. The Public Option should also avoid government accounting; independent accountants should verify that the Public Option’s pricing complies with the generally accepted accounting principles of private health insurers.   In addition, the Public Option could be priced to reduce Medicare's unfunded liabilities. This amortization of the expenses of the unfunded liabilities could be accomplished in many ways, such as charging them to all taxpayers, all Medicare recipients, or only higher-income recipients. We found that even if Medicare’s unfunded liability were amortized and included in the price of the Public Option, it would still cost less relative to those of the ACA and SME plans, by $550, $550, and $1,100, for Bronze, Gold and Silver plans, respectively.   The Brookings Institution worried that large employers with sicker employee pools would offer them only the government option. But consumers are so resistant to changes in their health plans that President Obama noted that a favorable aspect of the ACA was, “If you like your health plan, you can keep your health plan.” It is thus less likely that these employers would offer only this version of the Public Option. In any case, the health care expenses of employers with sicker labor forces are likely to be lower than those of the average retired Medicare enrollee.   Combining HRAs with the Public Option will also increase competition in the bloated U.S. health care system. Faced with competition from the HRA-Public Option combination, private health insurance companies would worry that their commanding positions in many metropolitan statistical areas are threatened. In nearly half of the largest population centers in America, one private insurer has at least 50 percent of the market. Their greatest strength is their creativity and flexibility, yet their dominance has lulled them into somnolence.   Private insurers could compete by reducing the estimated waste in the health care system of $900 billion; experts estimate that at least $250 billion could be saved without diminishing the quality of care. They could compete by offering policies that are politically infeasible for public insurance. For example, they could offer policies that transport members for care from high-cost locations to high-quality, low-cost ones.   Public insurance, in contrast, could not offer a policy that transports patients because the largest employer in nearly every Congressional district is the health industry.  Private insurers should have a freer range of competitive options through legislation that enables them to sell across state lines in the individual and small-group markets.   Further, they should be able to bundle health and liability products for efficiency.   To assure that the Public Option’s cost is not artificially reduced through funny money government accounting, the private insurers would be highly motivated to verify that the Public Option is accurately priced.   Combining the best ideas of Republicans and Democrats would create a hybrid of the HRA rule with the Public Option that would break even, not require additional taxes, lower prices for those insured by small- and medium-sized businesses and the self–insured, reduce average Medicare costs, likely expand coverage, and spur long dormant public-private competition.   This proposal does not reinvent the wheel. We just want to make sure that it is rolled more effectively by both sides of the aisle.   The calculations in this article are based upon our article in Health Affairs.  Regina E Herzlinger  is the Nancy R. McPherson Professor of Business Administration at the Harvard Business School.
   Richard J. Boxer, MD, is a Clinical Professor at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA.    [Image: iStock Photo] 